Discourse on The Causes of Quarrels

Thus have I heard — at one time, the Venerable Mahākaccāna was dwelling in Varaṇā, on the banks of the Bhaddasāri River.

Then, the brahmin Ārāmadaṇḍa approached the Venerable Mahākaccāna and, after exchanging greetings, sat down to one side. Seated there, the brahmin Ārāmadaṇḍa said to the Venerable Mahākaccāna:

"What, good Kaccāna, is the reason, what is the cause, why kshatriyas quarrel with kshatriyas, brahmins with brahmins, and householders with householders?"

"Brahmin, it is because of their attachment to sensual desire, their clinging to sensual desire, their engagement with sensual desire, their bondage to sensual desire, and their obsession with sensual desire that kshatriyas quarrel with kshatriyas, brahmins with brahmins, and householders with householders."

"What, good Kaccāna, is the reason, what is the cause, why ascetics quarrel with ascetics?"

"Brahmin, it is because of their attachment to views, their clinging to views, their engagement with views, their bondage to views, and their obsession with views that ascetics quarrel with ascetics."

"Is there anyone, good Kaccāna, in the world who has overcome this attachment to sensual desire, clinging to sensual desire, engagement with sensual desire, bondage to sensual desire, and obsession with sensual desire, as well as this attachment to views, clinging to views, engagement with views, bondage to views, and obsession with views?"

"There is, brahmin, someone in the world who has overcome this attachment to sensual desire, clinging to sensual desire, engagement with sensual desire, bondage to sensual desire, and obsession with sensual desire, as well as this attachment to views, clinging to views, engagement with views, bondage to views, and obsession with views."

"Who, good Kaccāna, is that person in the world who has overcome this attachment to sensual desire, clinging to sensual desire, engagement with sensual desire, bondage to sensual desire, and obsession with sensual desire, as well as this attachment to views, clinging to views, engagement with views, bondage to views, and obsession with views?"

"There is, brahmin, in the eastern regions, a city called Sāvatthi. There, the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One, is now living. He, brahmin, the Blessed One, has overcome this attachment to sensual desire, clinging to sensual desire, engagement with sensual desire, bondage to sensual desire, and obsession with sensual desire, as well as this attachment to views, clinging to views, engagement with views, bondage to views, and obsession with views."

When this was said, the brahmin Ārāmadaṇḍa rose from his seat, arranged his upper robe over one shoulder, and placing his right knee on the ground, he bowed down with his head at the feet of the Blessed One, and said three times:

"Homage to the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One!

Homage to the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One!

Homage to the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One!

Indeed, the Blessed One has overcome this attachment to sensual desire, clinging to sensual desire, engagement with sensual desire, bondage to sensual desire, and obsession with sensual desire. He has also overcome this attachment to views, clinging to views, engagement with views, bondage to views, and obsession with views.

Excellent, good Kaccāna! Excellent, good Kaccāna! Just as if one might set upright what was overturned, reveal what was hidden, show the way to one who was lost, or hold up a lamp in the darkness for those with eyesight to see forms, in the same way, good Kaccāna, the Dhamma has been explained by you in many ways. I go to the Blessed One for refuge, to the Dhamma, and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. May the Venerable Kaccāna accept me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge from today onward for life."