Chapter 11: The Difficult to Abandon

118
"Bhikkhus, there are two hopes that are difficult to abandon. What are the two? The hope for acquisitions and the hope for long life. These, bhikkhus, are the two hopes that are difficult to abandon."

119
"Bhikkhus, there are two kinds of people who are rare in the world. What are the two? The one who helps before being asked and the one who is grateful and acknowledges the help. These, bhikkhus, are the two kinds of people who are rare in the world."

120
"Bhikkhus, there are two kinds of people who are rare in the world. What are the two? The one who is content and the one who makes others content. These, bhikkhus, are the two kinds of people who are rare in the world."

121
"Bhikkhus, there are two kinds of people who are difficult to satisfy. What are the two? The one who throws away whatever he gets and the one who gives away whatever he gets. These, bhikkhus, are the two kinds of people who are difficult to satisfy."

122
"Bhikkhus, there are two kinds of people who are easily satisfied. What are the two? The one who does not throw away whatever he gets and the one who does not give away whatever he gets. These, bhikkhus, are the two kinds of people who are easily satisfied."

123
"Bhikkhus, there are two causes for the arising of passion. What are the two? The sign of the attractive and careless attention. These, bhikkhus, are the two causes for the arising of passion."

124
"Bhikkhus, there are two causes for the arising of aversion. What are the two? The sign of the repulsive and careless attention. These, bhikkhus, are the two causes for the arising of aversion."

125
"Bhikkhus, there are two causes for the arising of wrong view. What are the two? The utterance of another and careless attention. These, bhikkhus, are the two causes for the arising of wrong view."

126
"Bhikkhus, there are two causes for the arising of right view. What are the two? The utterance of another and careful attention. These, bhikkhus, are the two causes for the arising of right view."

127
"Bhikkhus, there are two kinds of offenses. What are the two? Light offenses and grave offenses. These, bhikkhus, are the two kinds of offenses."

128
"Bhikkhus, there are two kinds of offenses. What are the two? Gross offenses and non-gross offenses. These, bhikkhus, are the two kinds of offenses."

129
"Bhikkhus, there are two kinds of offenses. What are the two? Offenses with remainder and offenses without remainder. These, bhikkhus, are the two kinds of offenses."