Discourse on A Person with Internal and External Fetters

Thus have I heard — at one time, the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthi in the Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's park.

At that time, the Venerable Sāriputta was dwelling at Sāvatthi in the Eastern park, in Migāra's mother's mansion. There, the Venerable Sāriputta addressed the bhikkhus, saying: "Friends, bhikkhus."

"Friend," they responded to the Venerable Sāriputta. The Venerable Sāriputta said:

"I will explain to you, friends, the person with internal fetters and the person with external fetters. Listen to it, attend carefully, I will speak."

"Yes, friend," the bhikkhus responded to Venerable Sāriputta. The Venerable Sāriputta said:

"And what, friends, is the person with internal fetters? Here, friends, a bhikkhu is virtuous, restrained by the restraint of the precepts, accomplished in conduct and field of activity, seeing danger in the slightest faults, and having undertaken the training rules, trains in them. After breaking up of the body, beyond death, he arises in a certain heavenly realm. From there, having fallen away, he returns to this world. This is called, friends, the person with internal fetters who returns to this world.

And what, friends, is the person with external fetters? Here, friends, a bhikkhu is virtuous, restrained by the restraint of the precepts, accomplished in conduct and field of activity, seeing danger in the slightest faults, and having undertaken the training rules, trains in them. He arrives at and dwells in a certain peaceful release of mind. After breaking up of the body, beyond death, he arises in a certain heavenly realm. From there, having fallen away, he becomes a non-returner, one who does not come back to this world. This is called, friends, the person with external fetters who becomes a non-returner, one who does not come back to this world.

Furthermore, friends, a bhikkhu is virtuous, restrained by the restraint of the precepts, accomplished in conduct and field of activity, seeing danger in the slightest faults, and having undertaken the training rules, trains in them. He is engaged for the disenchantment, dispassion, and cessation of sensual pleasures. He is engaged for the disenchantment, dispassion, and cessation of existence. He is engaged for the ending of craving. He is engaged for the ending of greed. After breaking up the body, beyond death, he arises in a certain heavenly realm. From there, having fallen away, he becomes a non-returner, one who does not come back to this world. This is called, friends, the person with external fetters who becomes a non-returner, one who does not come back to this world."

Then many equanimous deities approached the Blessed One; having approached, they paid homage to the Blessed One and stood to one side. Standing to one side, those deities said to the Blessed One: "Venerable sir, the Venerable Sāriputta is teaching the bhikkhus at the Eastern park, in Migāra's mother's mansion, about the person with internal fetters and the person with external fetters. The assembly is joyful. Venerable sir, it would be good if the Blessed One, out of compassion, would approach the Venerable Sāriputta." The Blessed One consented by silence.

Then the Blessed One — just as a strong man might extend his bent arm or bend his extended arm — disappeared from Jeta's Grove and reappeared in the Eastern park,  in Migāra's mother's mansion, in front of the Venerable Sāriputta. The Blessed One sat down on the prepared seat. The Venerable Sāriputta also paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down to one side. Sitting to one side, the Blessed One said to the Venerable Sāriputta:

"Here, Sāriputta, many equanimous deities approached me; having approached, they paid homage to me and stood to one side. Standing to one side, those deities said to me: 'Venerable sir, the Venerable Sāriputta is teaching the bhikkhus at the Eastern park, in Migāra's mother's mansion, about the person with internal fetters and the person with external fetters. The assembly is joyful. Venerable sir, it would be good if the Blessed One, out of compassion, would approach the Venerable Sāriputta.'

However, Sāriputta, those deities, even when they become ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, or sixty, even at the tip of a needle, they stand without obstructing each other.

It might be, however, Sāriputta, one might think thus: 'Surely, the minds of those deities are so developed that even when they become ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, or sixty, they stand at the tip of a needle without obstructing each other.' However, Sāriputta, this should not be seen in this way. Here itself, Sāriputta, the minds of those deities became so developed that even when they become ten ... and do not obstruct each other."

Therefore, Sāriputta, you should train thus: 'We will be calm in faculties, calm in mind.' Thus, you should train, Sāriputta. For in those with calm faculties and calm minds, only calm bodily action, calm verbal action, and calm mental action will arise. We will offer only calm offerings to our fellow practitioners. Thus, you should train, Sāriputta.

Indeed, Sāriputta, the wanderers of other sects will not hear this teaching of the Dhamma."