Discourse on Fire with Vacchagotta

Thus have I heard — At one time, the Blessed One was dwelling in Sāvatthi, in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's Park.

Then, the wandering ascetic Vacchagotta approached the Blessed One; having approached, he exchanged greetings with the Blessed One. After their cordial and meaningful conversation had concluded, he sat to one side. Seated to one side, the wandering ascetic Vacchagotta said to the Blessed One:

"Master Gotama, is it your view that 'the world is eternal, this alone is true, anything else is meaningless'?"

"It is not my view, Vaccha, that 'the world is eternal, this alone is true, anything else is meaningless'."

"Then, Master Gotama, is it your view that 'the world is not eternal, this alone is true, anything else is meaningless'?"

"It is not my view, Vaccha, that 'the world is not eternal, this alone is true, anything else is meaningless'."

"Is it then, Master Gotama, your view that 'the world is finite, this alone is true, anything else is meaningless'?"

"It is not my view, Vaccha, that 'the world is finite, this alone is true, anything else is meaningless'."

"Then, Master Gotama, is it your view that 'the world is infinite, this alone is true, anything else is meaningless'?"

"It is not my view, Vaccha, that 'the world is infinite, this alone is true, anything else is meaningless'."

"Master Gotama, is it your view that 'the soul and the body are the same, this alone is true, anything else is meaningless'?"

"It is not my view, Vaccha, that 'the soul and the body are the same, this alone is true, anything else is meaningless'."

"Then, Master Gotama, is it your view that 'the soul is one thing and the body another, this alone is true, anything else is meaningless'?"

"It is not my view, Vaccha, that 'the soul is one thing and the body another, this alone is true, anything else is meaningless'."

"Master Gotama, is it your view that 'a Tathāgata exists after death, this alone is true, anything else is meaningless'?"

"It is not my view, Vaccha, that 'a Tathāgata exists after death, this alone is true, anything else is meaningless'."

"Then, Master Gotama, is it your view that 'a Tathāgata does not exist after death, this alone is true, anything else is meaningless'?"

"It is not my view, Vaccha, that 'a Tathāgata does not exist after death, this alone is true, anything else is meaningless'."

"Is it then, Master Gotama, your view that 'a Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death, this alone is true, anything else is meaningless'?"

"It is not my view, Vaccha, that 'a Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death, this alone is true, anything else is meaningless'."

"Then, Master Gotama, is it your view that 'a Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death, this alone is true, anything else is meaningless'?"

"It is not my view, Vaccha, that 'a Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death, this alone is true, anything else is meaningless'."

"But, Master Gotama, do you have any speculative view?"

"Vaccha, 'speculative view' is something that the Tathāgata has done away with. What the Tathāgata sees is this: 'Such is form, such its origin, such its passing away; such is feeling, such its origin, such its passing away; such is perception, such its origin, such its passing away; such are volitional formations, such their origin, such their passing away; such is consciousness, such its origin, such its passing away.' Therefore, I say, with the destruction, fading away, cessation, giving up, and relinquishing of all conceivings, all excogitations, all I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit, the Tathāgata is liberated through not clinging."

"Being thus liberated, Master Gotama, where does a bhikkhu reappear?"

"'Reappear,' Vaccha, does not apply."

"In that case, Master Gotama, he does not reappear?"

"'Does not reappear,' Vaccha, does not apply."

"In that case, Master Gotama, he both reappears and does not reappear?"

"'Both reappears and does not reappear,' Vaccha, does not apply."

"In that case, Master Gotama, he neither reappears nor does not reappear?"

"'Neither reappears nor does not reappear,' Vaccha, does not apply."

“Master Gotama, when asked these ten questions, you say: ‘That’s not my view.’

"What, Master Gotama, seeing the drawback, have you not adopted any of these (speculative) views?"

"Vaccha, the view 'the world is eternal' is a thicket of views, a wilderness, a tangle, a vexation, a fetter, accompanied by suffering, agitation, distress, and fever. It does not lead to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to calm, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, nor to Nibbāna. The view 'the world is not eternal'... 'the world is finite'... 'the world is infinite'... 'the soul and the body are the same'... 'the soul is one thing and the body another'... 'a Tathāgata exists after death'... 'a Tathāgata does not exist after death'... 'a Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death'... 'a Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death'... all these views are a thicket, a wilderness, a tangle, a vexation, a fetter, accompanied by suffering, agitation, distress, and fever. They do not lead to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to calm, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, nor to Nibbāna. Seeing the danger in these views, Vaccha, I have not adopted them."

"Do you, Master Gotama, hold any speculative view?"

"Vaccha, 'speculative view' is something the Tathāgata has gone beyond. The Tathāgata sees this: 'Such is form, its arising, its passing away; such is feeling, its arising, its passing away; such is perception, its arising, its passing away; such are volitional formations, their arising, their passing away; such is consciousness, its arising, its passing away.' Therefore, I say, the Tathāgata is liberated through the eradication, fading away, cessation, relinquishment, and non-clinging to all conceit, all constructs of 'I' and 'mine,' all underlying tendencies to conceit, declaring liberation as being free from clinging."

"Being thus liberated, Master Gotama, where does a bhikkhu reappear?"

"Vaccha, 'reappear' does not apply."

"Then, Master Gotama, he does not reappear?"

"Vaccha, 'does not reappear' also does not apply."

"Then, Master Gotama, does he both reappear and not reappear?"

"Vaccha, 'both reappears and does not reappear' does not apply."

"Then, Master Gotama, does he neither reappear nor not reappear?"

"Vaccha, 'neither reappears nor does not reappear' does not apply."

"When questioned, 'Being thus liberated in mind, Master Gotama, where does a bhikkhu reappear?' you replied, 'Vaccha, 'reappears' does not apply.' When further asked, 'Then, he does not reappear?' you answered, 'Vaccha, 'does not reappear' does not apply.' When pressed if 'he both reappears and does not reappear,' you stated, 'Vaccha, 'both reappears and does not reappear' does not apply.' And when queried whether 'he neither reappears nor does not reappear,' you clarified, 'Vaccha, 'neither reappears nor does not reappear' does not apply.' At this, I reached a state of confusion and bewilderment, Master Gotama. Even the slight faith I had from our earlier conversation has now vanished."

"It is sufficient, Vaccha, for confusion and bewilderment. This Dhamma, Vaccha, is profound, hard to see, hard to understand, peaceful, sublime, beyond the sphere of reasoning, subtle, understandable only by the wise. It is difficult for you to understand this, being of another view, another faith, another inclination, following a different teacher.

So, Vaccha, let me question you instead; answer as you see fit.

What do you think, Vaccha, if a fire were burning in front of you, would you know, 'This fire is burning in front of me'?"

"If there were a fire burning in front of me, Master Gotama, I would know, 'This fire is burning in front of me.'"

"And if someone were to ask you, 'This fire burning in front of you, on what does it depend?' how would you answer?"

"If asked, 'This fire burning in front of you, on what does it depend?' Master Gotama, I would answer, 'This fire burning in front of me depends on grass and wood for fuel.'"

"If that fire in front of you were to be extinguished, Vaccha, would you know, 'This fire in front of me has been extinguished'?"

"If that fire in front of me were to be extinguished, Master Gotama, I would know, 'This fire in front of me has been extinguished.'"

"And if someone were to ask you, 'This fire that has been extinguished, in which direction has it gone — east, south, west, or north?' how would you respond?"

"It does not apply, Master Gotama. For that fire, having burned dependent on grass and wood for fuel, being consumed, and not being offered any more fuel, is said to be extinguished."

"In the same way, Vaccha, whatever form by which one might define the Tathāgata, that form has been abandoned, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated so that it is no more subject to future arising. Freed from the classification by form, Vaccha, the Tathāgata is profound, immeasurable, hard to fathom like the great ocean. 'Reappears' does not apply, 'does not reappear' does not apply, 'both reappears and does not reappear' does not apply, 'neither reappears nor does not reappear' does not apply."

Whatever feeling by which one might designate the Tathāgata, that feeling has been abandoned by the Tathāgata, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, so it is no longer subject to future arising. Freed from the classification by feeling, Vaccha, the Tathāgata is profound, immeasurable, hard to fathom, like the great ocean. 'Reappears' does not apply, 'does not reappear' does not apply, 'both reappears and does not reappear' does not apply, 'neither reappears nor does not reappear' does not apply.

Whatever perception by which one might designate the Tathāgata, that perception has been abandoned by the Tathāgata, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, so it is no longer subject to future arising. Freed from the classification by perception, Vaccha, the Tathāgata is profound, immeasurable, hard to fathom, like the great ocean. 'Reappears' does not apply, 'does not reappear' does not apply, 'both reappears and does not reappear' does not apply, 'neither reappears nor does not reappear' does not apply.

Whatever volitional formations by which one might designate the Tathāgata, those volitional formations have been abandoned by the Tathāgata, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, so they are no longer subject to future arising. Freed from the classification by volitional formations, Vaccha, the Tathāgata is profound, immeasurable, hard to fathom, like the great ocean. 'Reappears' does not apply, 'does not reappear' does not apply, 'both reappears and does not reappear' does not apply, 'neither reappears nor does not reappear' does not apply.

Whatever consciousness by which one might designate the Tathāgata, that consciousness has been abandoned by the Tathāgata, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, so it is no longer subject to future arising. Freed from the classification by consciousness, Vaccha, the Tathāgata is profound, immeasurable, hard to fathom, like the great ocean. 'Reappears' does not apply, 'does not reappear' does not apply, 'both reappears and does not reappear' does not apply, 'neither reappears nor does not reappear' does not apply."

After these words were spoken, the wandering ascetic Vacchagotta said to the Blessed One:

"Just as, Master Gotama, near a village or town, there stands a great sala tree. Its branches and leaves fall off, its bark peels away, and its sapwood disintegrates. In time, it stands clean, devoid of branches, bark, and sapwood, established in its heartwood. Similarly, the teaching of Master Gotama stands purified, free of branches, bark, and sapwood, established in its essence.

Marvelous, Master Gotama! Allow me to take refuge in Master Gotama from this day forth as long as life lasts, having gone to him for refuge."