Discourse on Unconditioned

"I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the unconditioned and the path leading to the unconditioned. Listen to this.

And what, bhikkhus, is the unconditioned? The ending of passion (greed, desire, attachment), the ending of aversion (ill-will, hatred, resentment), the ending of delusion (assumption making tendencies, absence of close examination and verification) — this, bhikkhus, is called the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? It is tranquility (samatho). This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

Thus, bhikkhus, I have taught you about the unconditioned, the path leading to the unconditioned.

What should be done for his disciples out of compassion by a teacher who seeks their welfare and has compassion for them, that I have done for you, bhikkhus. These are the roots of trees, these are empty huts. Meditate, bhikkhus, do not be negligent; lest you regret it later. This is our instruction to you.

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the unconditioned and the path leading to the unconditioned. Listen to this.

And what, bhikkhus, is the unconditioned? The ending of greed (lust, desire, attachment), the ending of aversion (ill-will, hatred, resentment), and the ending of delusion (assumption making tendencies, absence of close examination and verification) — this is called, bhikkhus, the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? It is insight (vipassanā). This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned. Thus, I have taught you about the unconditioned, the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned?

It is concentration accompanied by reflection and examination.

... It is concentration with reflection only.

... It is concentration without reflection or examination.

... It is the concentration of emptiness.

... It is the concentration absent of any signs (signless).

It is the concentration in desirelessness (undirected). This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned. Thus, I have taught you about the unconditioned, the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu dwells contemplating the body in the body, ardent, fully aware, mindful, having removed greed and dissatisfaction in regard to the world. This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, a bhikkhu dwells contemplating feelings in feelings, ardent, fully aware, mindful, having removed greed and dissatisfaction in regard to the world. This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, a bhikkhu dwells contemplating mind in mind,ardent, fully aware, mindful, having removed greed and dissatisfaction in regard to the world. This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, a bhikkhu dwells contemplating mental qualities in mental qualities, ardent, fully aware, mindful, having removed greed and dissatisfaction in regard to the world. This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu generates desire, applies effort, arouses energy, takes hold of his mind, and strives to prevent the arising of unarisen unwholesome states. This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, a bhikkhu generates desire, applies effort, arouses energy, takes hold of his mind, and strives to abandon arisen unwholesome states. This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, a bhikkhu generates desire, applies effort, arouses energy, takes hold of his mind, and strives for the arising of unarisen wholesome states. This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, a bhikkhu generates desire, applies effort, arouses energy, takes hold of his mind, and strives for the continuance, non-confusion, further growth, increase, and fulfillment by development of arisen wholesome states. This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops the foundation for success that is comprised of concentration based on interest and persistence. This is called, bhikkhus, the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops the foundation for success that is comprised of concentration based on energy and persistence. This is called, bhikkhus, the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops the foundation for success that is comprised of concentration based on the development of mind and persistence. This is called, bhikkhus, the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops the foundation for success that is comprised of concentration based on investigation (of the teachings and one's experiences) and persistence. This is called, bhikkhus, the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops the faculty of faith, which leads to solitude, leads to dispassion, leads to cessation, culminates in letting go. This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, a bhikkhu develops the faculty of persistence, which leads to solitude, leads to dispassion, leads to cessation, culminates in letting go. This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, a bhikkhu develops the faculty of mindfulness, which leads to solitude, leads to dispassion, leads to cessation, culminates in letting go. This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, a bhikkhu develops the faculty of concentration, which leads to solitude, leads to dispassion, leads to cessation, culminates in letting go. This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, a bhikkhu develops the faculty of wisdom, which leads to solitude, leads to dispassion, leads to cessation, culminates in letting go. This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops the strength of faith, which leads to solitude, leads to dispassion, leads to cessation, culminates in letting go. This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, a bhikkhu develops the strength of persistence (energy),  which leads to solitude, leads to dispassion, leads to cessation, culminates in letting go. This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, a bhikkhu develops the strength of mindfulness, which leads to solitude, leads to dispassion, leads to cessation, culminates in letting go. This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, a bhikkhu develops the strength of concentration, which leads to solitude, leads to dispassion, leads to cessation, culminates in letting go. This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, a bhikkhu develops the strength of wisdom, which leads to solitude, leads to dispassion, leads to cessation, culminates in letting go. This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops the awakening factor of mindfulness, which leads to solitude, leads to dispassion, leads to cessation, culminates in letting go. This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

... awakening factor of investigation of phenomena... awakening factor of persistence... awakening factor of joy (rapture)... awakening factor of tranquility... awakening factor of concentration... awakening factor of equanimity, develops the awakening factor of equanimity, which leads to solitude, leads to dispassion, leads to cessation, culminates in letting go. This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to the unconditioned? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops right view, which leads to solitude, leads to dispassion, leads to cessation, culminates in letting go. This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

develops right intention... develops right speech... develops right action... develops right livelihood... develops right effort... develops right mindfulness... develops right concentration, which leads to solitude, leads to dispassion, leads to cessation, culminates in letting go.

This, bhikkhus, is called the path leading to the unconditioned.

Thus, bhikkhus, I have taught you about the unconditioned, the path leading to the unconditioned.

What should be done for his disciples out of compassion by a teacher who seeks their welfare and has compassion for them, that I have done for you, bhikkhus. These are the roots of trees, these are empty huts. Meditate, bhikkhus, do not be negligent; lest you regret it later. This is our instruction to you."