Discourse on The Taintless

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the taintless and the path leading to the taintless. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the taintless? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the truth and the path leading to the truth. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the truth? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the far shore and the path leading to the far shore. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the far shore? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the subtle and the path leading to the subtle. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the subtle? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the hard to see and the path leading to the hard to see. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the hard to see? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the unaging and the path leading to the unaging. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the unaging? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the stable and the path leading to the stable. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the stable? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the non-disintegrating and the path leading to the non-disintegrating. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the non-disintegrating? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the signless and the path leading to the signless. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the signless? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the non-proliferation and the path leading to non-proliferation. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is non-proliferation? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the peaceful and the path leading to the peaceful. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the peaceful? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the deathless and the path leading to the deathless. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the deathless? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the excellent and the path leading to the excellent. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the excellent? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the auspicious and the path leading to the auspicious. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the auspicious? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the safe and the path leading to the safe. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the safe? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the wearing away of craving and the path leading to the wearing away of craving. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the wearing away of craving? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the wonderful and the path leading to the wonderful. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the wonderful? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the marvelous and the path leading to the marvelous. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the marvelous? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the freedom from calamity and the path leading to the freedom from calamity. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the freedom from calamity? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the nature of impermanence and the path leading to the understanding of impermanence. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the nature of impermanence? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about Nibbāna and the path leading to Nibbāna. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is Nibbāna? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the blameless and the path leading to the blameless. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the blameless? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about dispassion and the path leading to dispassion. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is dispassion? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about purity and the path leading to purity. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is purity? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about freedom and the path leading to freedom. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is freedom? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the non-clinging and the path leading to the non-clinging. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the non-clinging? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the island and the path leading to the island. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the island? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the security and the path leading to the security. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the security? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the protection and the path leading to the protection. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the protection? …

I will teach you, bhikkhus, about the shelter and the path leading to the shelter. Listen to this. And what, bhikkhus, is the shelter? …