The Discourse on Unobtainable States

"These five states, bhikkhus, are unobtainable by an ascetic, a brahmin, a deity, Māra, Brahmā, or anyone else in the world. What are these five? (1) The state 'do not grow old' when subject to aging is unobtainable by an ascetic, a brahmin, a deity, Māra, Brahmā, or anyone in the world. (2) The state 'do not fall ill' when subject to illness ... (3) 'do not die' when subject to death ... (4) 'do not be destroyed' when subject to destruction ... (5) 'do not be lost' when subject to loss is unobtainable by an ascetic, a brahmin, a deity, Māra, Brahmā, or anyone else in the world.

(1) Bhikkhus, for an uninstructed ordinary person, what is subject to aging inevitably ages (grows old). When this occurs, he does not reflect thus: 'I am not the only one for whom what is subject to aging ages. For all beings that cycle through coming and going, passing away, and rebirth, what is subject to aging ages. If I were to grieve, grow weary, lament, weep beating my breast, and become disoriented when what is subject to old age grows old, my food would not satisfy me, my appearance would deteriorate, I would not be able to carry out my tasks, my enemies would be delighted, and my friends would be disheartened.' Thus, when what is subject to old age grows old, he grieves, grows weary, laments, weeps beating his breast, and becomes disoriented. This is called an uninstructed ordinary person pierced by the poisonous dart of sorrow, who only torments himself.

(2) Again, for the uninstructed ordinary person, what is subject to illness falls ill … (3) … what is subject to death dies … (4) … what is subject to destruction is destroyed … (5) … what is subject to loss is lost. When this occurs, he does not reflect thus: 'I am not the only one for whom what is subject to loss is lost. For all beings that cycle through coming and going, passing away, and rebirth, what is subject to aging grows old. If I were to grieve, grow weary, lament, weep beating my breast, and become disoriented when what is subject to loss is lost, my food would not satisfy me, my appearance would deteriorate, I would not be able to carry out my tasks, my enemies would be delighted, and my friends would be disheartened.' Thus, when what is subject to loss is lost, he grieves, grows weary, laments, weeps beating his breast, and becomes disoriented. This is called an uninstructed ordinary person pierced by the poisonous dart of sorrow, who only torments himself.

(1) Bhikkhus, for a learned disciple of the noble ones, what is subject to aging inevitably ages (grows old). When this occurs, he reflects thus: 'I am not the only one for whom what is subject to aging ages. For all beings that cycle through coming and going, passing away, and rebirth, what is subject to aging ages. If I were to grieve, grow weary, lament, weep beating my breast, and become disoriented when what is subject to old age grows old, my food would not satisfy me, my appearance would deteriorate, I would not be able to carry out my tasks, my enemies would be delighted, and my friends would be disheartened.' Thus, when what is subject to old age grows old, he does not grieve, he does not grow weary, does not lament, does not weep beating his breast and does not become disoriented. This is said, bhikkhus: 'A learned disciple of the noble ones who has extracted the poisonous dart of sorrow with which the uninstructed ordinary person pierces and torments himself. He, free from sorrow and without a dart, personally attains complete Nibbāna.'

(2) Furthermore, bhikkhus, for the learned disciple of the noble ones, what is subject to illness becomes ill... (3) what is subject to death dies... (4) what is subject to destruction is destroyed... (5) what is subject to loss is lost. When this occurs, he reflects thus: 'It is not only I who lose what is subject to loss. Indeed, for all beings that cycle through coming and going, passing away, and rebirth, what is subject to loss is lost by all. If I were to grieve, grow weary, lament, weep beating my breast, and become disoriented when what is subject to loss is lost, my food would not satisfy me, my appearance would deteriorate, I would be unable to carry out my tasks, my enemies would be delighted, and my friends would be disheartened.' Thus, when what is subject to loss is lost, he does not grieve, does not grow weary, does not lament, does not weep beating his breast, and does not become disoriented. This is said, bhikkhus: 'A learned disciple of the noble ones who has removed the poisonous dart of sorrow, with which the uninstructed ordinary person pierces and torments himself. He, free from sorrow and without a dart, personally attains complete Nibbāna.'

These, bhikkhus, are the five unobtainable states by an ascetic, a brahmin, a deity, Māra, Brahmā, or anyone else in the world."

"Not by grieving nor lamenting
is even a little good achieved;
knowing someone is distressed and grieving,
enemies become delighted.

When the wise one does not waver in adversity,
skilled in discerning what is good,
their enemies become disheartened
upon seeing their steadfast, unchanged expression.

Through chanting, mantras, or well-spoken words,
through giving out or according to tradition;
wherever and however one might gain one’s good,
there one should exert oneself accordingly.

If one realizes that this good
cannot be achieved by oneself or by anyone else,
one should remain composed,
thinking: 'Kamma is decisive; what can I do now?'"