Seeing Discontentment leads to Nibbāna

"I will teach you the path that leads to Nibbāna, bhikkhus. Listen closely.

And what, bhikkhus, is the path leading to Nibbāna?

Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu sees the eye as discontentment, sees forms as discontentment, sees eye-consciousness as discontentment, sees eye-contact as discontentment. Whatever feeling arises with eye-contact as its condition—whether pleasant, painful, or neither-painful-nor-pleasant, he sees that too as discontentment.

He sees the ear as discontentment, hears sounds as discontentment, sees ear-consciousness as discontentment, sees ear-contact as discontentment. Whatever feeling arises with ear-contact as its condition—whether pleasant, painful, or neither-painful-nor-pleasant, he sees that too as discontentment.

He sees the nose as discontentment, smells as discontentment, sees nose-consciousness as discontentment, sees nose-contact as discontentment. Whatever feeling arises with nose-contact as its condition—whether pleasant, painful, or neither-painful-nor-pleasant, he sees that too as discontentment.

He sees the tongue as discontentment, tastes as discontentment, sees tongue-consciousness as discontentment, sees tongue-contact as discontentment. Whatever feeling arises with tongue-contact as its condition - whether pleasant, painful or neighter-painful-nor-pleasant, he sees that too as discontentment.

He sees the body as discontentment, tactile sensations as discontentment, sees body-consciousness as discontentment, sees body-contact as discontentment. Whatever feeling arises with body-contact as its condition—whether pleasant, painful, or neither-painful-nor-pleasant, he sees that too as discontentment.

He sees the mind as discontentment, mental qualities as discontentment, mind-consciousness as discontentment, mind-contact as discontentment. Whatever feeling arises with mind-contact as its condition—whether pleasant, painful, or neither-painful-nor-pleasant, he sees that too as discontentment.

This, bhikkhus, is the path leading to Nibbāna."