Discourse on the Nibbāna Element

Thus have I heard - The Blessed One, the Worthy One, has spoken thus:

"There are, bhikkhus, two Nibbāna elements. What are the two? The Nibbāna element with residue remaining and the Nibbāna element with no residue remaining.

And what, bhikkhus, is the Nibbāna element with residue remaining? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu is an arahant, with taints eradicated, having lived the holy life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved the ultimate goal, severed the fetters of existence, and is fully liberated through right wisdom (complete comprehension, perfect understanding). However, his five sense faculties still operate. Because of their operation without impairment, he experiences what is agreeable and disagreeable, and feels pleasure and pain. The ending of passion (greed, desire, attachment), the ending of aversion (ill-will, hatred, resentment), the ending of delusion (assumption making tendencies, absence of close examination and verification) — this is called, bhikkhus, the Nibbāna element with residue remaining.

And what, bhikkhus, is the Nibbāna element without residue remaining? In this case, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu is an arahant, with taints eradicated, having lived the holy life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved the ultimate goal, severed the fetters of existence, and is fully liberated through right wisdom (complete comprehension, perfect understanding). Here, bhikkhus, right in this very life, all sensations will cool down and will not be delighted in any longer. This is called, bhikkhus, the Nibbāna element without residue remaining. These, bhikkhus, are the two elements of Nibbāna."

The Blessed One spoke thus, it is said:

"These two elements of Nibbāna were clarified
By the one with insight, detached and serene.
The first element pertains to this current life,
it is what remains when the bond to rebirth is broken;
The second element pertains to beyond this life,
where all states of existence utterly cease.

Those who, understanding this, attain the unconditioned state,
their minds liberated, the bond to rebirth broken;
reaching the essence of the Dhamma, delighting in its cessation,
such balanced ones relinquish all states of existence."

This matter too was spoken by the Blessed One, thus have I heard.