The World

At Sāvatthi.

"I will teach you, bhikkhus, both the appearance and the dissolution of the world. Listen to this and pay close attention, I will speak."

"Indeed, venerable sir," the bhikkhus replied to the Blessed One. The Blessed One said:

"And what, bhikkhus, is the appearance of the world? Depending on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. From contact as a condition, comes feeling; from feeling as a condition, comes craving; from craving as a condition, comes clinging (grasping/holding on); from clinging as a condition, comes continued existence; from continued existence as a condition, comes birth; from birth as a condition, then aging and death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, displeasure, and despair come to be. This, bhikkhus, is the appearance of the world.

Depending on the ear and sounds, ear-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. From contact as a condition, comes feeling; from feeling as a condition, comes craving; from craving as a condition, comes clinging; from clinging as a condition, comes continued existence; from continued existence as a condition, comes birth; from birth as a condition, then aging and death, sorrow, lamentation, discontentment, displeasure, and despair come to be. This, bhikkhus, is the appearance of the world.

Depending on the nose and odors, nose-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. From contact as a condition, comes feeling; from feeling as a condition, comes craving; from craving as a condition, comes clinging; from clinging as a condition, comes continued existence; from continued existence as a condition, comes birth; from birth as a condition, then aging and death, sorrow, lamentation, discontentment, displeasure, and despair come to be. This, bhikkhus, is the appearance of the world.

Depending on the tongue and flavors, tongue-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. From contact as a condition, comes feeling; from feeling as a condition, comes craving; from craving as a condition, comes clinging; from clinging as a condition, comes continued existence; from continued existence as a condition, comes birth; from birth as a condition, then aging and death, sorrow, lamentation, discontentment, displeasure, and despair come to be. This, bhikkhus, is the appearance of the world.

Depending on the body and tactile sensations, body-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. From contact as a condition, comes feeling; from feeling as a condition, comes craving; from craving as a condition, comes clinging; from clinging as a condition, comes continued existence; from continued existence as a condition, comes birth; from birth as a condition, then aging and death, sorrow, lamentation, discontentment, displeasure, and despair come to be. This, bhikkhus, is the appearance of the world.

Depending on the mind and mental experiences, mind-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. From contact as a condition, comes feeling; from feeling as a condition, comes craving; from craving as a condition, comes clinging; from clinging as a condition, comes continued existence; from continued existence as a condition, comes birth; from birth as a condition, then aging and death, sorrow, lamentation, discontentment, displeasure, and despair come to be. This, bhikkhus, is the appearance of the world.

And what, bhikkhus, is the dissolution of the world? Depending on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. From contact as a condition, comes feeling; from feeling as a condition, comes craving. Through the complete fading away and ending of that very craving comes the dissolution of clinging; through the dissolution of clinging comes the dissolution of continued existence; through the dissolution of continued existence comes the dissolution of birth; through the dissolution of birth comes the dissolution of aging and death; thus the entire mass of discontentment ceases. This, bhikkhus, is the dissolution of the world.

Depending on the ear and sounds … on the nose and odors … on the tongue and flavors … on the body and tactile sensations … on the mind and mental experiences, mind-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. From contact as a condition, comes feeling; from feeling as a condition, comes craving. Through the complete fading away and dissolution of that very craving comes the dissolution of clinging; through the dissolution of clinging comes the dissolution of continued existence; through the dissolution of continued existence comes the dissolution of birth; through the dissolution of birth comes the dissolution of aging and death; thus the entire mass of discontentment ceases. This, bhikkhus, is the dissolution of the world."