At Sāvatthi.

Then the venerable Kaccānagotta went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side. Seated at one side, the venerable Kaccānagotta said to the Blessed One:

"'Right view, right view,' it is said, venerable sir. To what extent, venerable sir, is there right view?"

"The world, Kaccāna, for the most part depends on a duality—on the notion of existence and non-existence.

But for one who sees the origin of the world as it really is with correct wisdom, there is no notion of non-existence in regard to the world. And for one who sees the cessation of the world as it really is with correct wisdom, there is no notion of existence in regard to the world.

This world, Kaccāna, is mostly bound by attachment, insistence on opinions, and adherence to ritual.

And here, Kaccāna, one does not hold the view 'This is myself.' One does not doubt or question that 'When suffering arises, it arises; when suffering ceases, it ceases.' Instead, there is knowledge independent of others in this matter.

This, Kaccāna, is how there is right view.

'Everything exists:' this is one extreme.

'Nothing exists:' this is the second extreme.

Without going to either of these extremes, the Tathāgata teaches the Dhamma by the middle: 'With ignorance as condition, formations arise; with formations as condition, consciousness arises; with consciousness as condition, name-and-form arises; with name-and-form as condition, the six sense bases arise; with the six sense bases as condition, contact arises; with contact as condition, feeling arises; with feeling as condition, craving arises; with craving as condition, clinging arises; with clinging as condition, becoming arises; with becoming as condition, birth arises; with birth as condition, aging and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair arise. This is the origin of this entire mass of suffering.

With the complete fading away and cessation of ignorance comes the cessation of formations; with the cessation of formations, cessation of consciousness; with the cessation of consciousness, cessation of name-and-form; with the cessation of name-and-form, cessation of the six sense bases; with the cessation of the six sense bases, cessation of contact; with the cessation of contact, cessation of feeling; with the cessation of feeling, cessation of craving; with the cessation of craving, cessation of clinging; with the cessation of clinging, cessation of becoming; with the cessation of becoming, cessation of birth; with the cessation of birth, aging and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair cease. Thus is the cessation of this entire mass of suffering.'"