Discourse on Dependent Origination

Thus have I heard — at one time, the Blessed One was staying in Sāvatthi, in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's Park. There, the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus: "Bhikkhus."

"Venerable sir," those bhikkhus responded to the Blessed One. The Blessed One said:

"I will teach you the dependent origination. Listen well and pay close attention, I will speak."

"Yes, venerable sir," those bhikkhus responded to the Blessed One. The Blessed One said:

"And what, bhikkhus, is dependent origination? With ignorance as condition, bhikkhus, volitions [formations]; with volitions as condition, consciousness; with consciousness as condition, name-and-form; with name-and-form as condition, the six sense bases; with the six sense bases as condition, contact; with contact as condition, feeling; with feeling as condition, craving; with craving as condition, clinging (grasping); with clinging (grasping) as condition, continued existence; with continued existence as condition, birth; with birth as condition, aging and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair come to be. This is the origin of this whole mass of suffering. This is called, bhikkhus, dependent origination.

With the complete fading away and cessation of ignorance comes cessation of volitions; with the cessation of volitions, cessation of consciousness; with the cessation of consciousness, cessation of name-and-form; with the cessation of name-and-form, cessation of the six sense bases; with the cessation of the six sense bases, cessation of contact; with the cessation of contact, cessation of feeling; with the cessation of feeling, cessation of craving; with the cessation of craving, cessation of clinging; with the cessation of clinging, cessation of continued existence; with the cessation of continued existence, cessation of birth; with the cessation of birth, aging and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair cease. This is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering."

The Blessed One said this.  The bhikkhus, delighted, rejoiced in the Blessed One's words.