The World

At Sāvatthi.

"I will teach you, bhikkhus, both the origin and the cessation of the world. Listen to this and pay close attention, I will speak."

"Indeed, venerable sir," the bhikkhus replied to the Blessed One. The Blessed One said:

"And what, bhikkhus, is the origin of the world? Depending on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. From contact as a condition, comes feeling; from feeling as a condition, comes craving; from craving as a condition, comes clinging (grasping/holding on); from clinging as a condition, comes continued existence; from continued existence as a condition, comes birth; from birth as a condition, then aging and death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, displeasure, and despair come to be. This, bhikkhus, is the origin of the world.

Depending on the ear and sounds, ear-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. From contact, as a condition, comes feeling; ... from birth, as a condition, then aging and death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, displeasure, and despair come to be. This, bhikkhus, is the origin of the world.

Depending on the nose and odors, nose-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. From contact, as a condition, comes feeling; ... from birth, as a condition, then aging and death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, displeasure, and despair come to be. This, bhikkhus, is the origin of the world.

Depending on the tongue and flavors, tongue-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. From contact, as a condition, comes feeling; ... from birth, as a condition, then aging and death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, displeasure, and despair come to be. This, bhikkhus, is the origin of the world.

Depending on the body and tactile sensations, body-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. From contact, as a condition, comes feeling; ... from birth, as a condition, then aging and death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, displeasure, and despair come to be. This, bhikkhus, is the origin of the world.

Depending on the mind and mental objects, mind-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. From contact, as a condition, comes feeling; ... from birth, as a condition, then aging and death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, displeasure, and despair come to be. This, bhikkhus, is the origin of the world.

And what, bhikkhus, is the cessation of the world? Depending on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. From contact, as a condition, comes feeling; from feeling, as a condition, comes craving. Through the complete fading away and cessation of that very craving comes the cessation of clinging; through the cessation of clinging comes the cessation of continued existence; through the cessation of continued existence comes the cessation of birth; through the cessation of birth comes the cessation of aging and death; thus the entire mass of suffering ceases. This, bhikkhus, is the cessation of the world.

Depending on the ear and sounds … on the nose and odors … on the tongue and flavors … on the body and tactile sensations … on the mind and mental objects, mind-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. From contact, as a condition, comes feeling; from feeling, as a condition, comes craving. Through the complete fading away and cessation of that very craving comes the cessation of clinging; through the cessation of clinging comes the cessation of continued existence; through the cessation of continued existence comes the cessation of birth; through the cessation of birth comes the cessation of aging and death; thus the entire mass of suffering ceases. This, bhikkhus, is the cessation of the world."