Discourse on Supporting Conditions

At Sāvatthi.

"I will teach you, bhikkhus, about dependent origination and the phenomena arisen from dependent origination. Listen carefully, pay close attention, I will speak."

"So be it, Venerable Sir," those bhikkhus replied to the Blessed One. The Blessed One said:

"What, bhikkhus, is dependent origination? With birth as condition, bhikkhus, there is aging and death. Whether Tathāgatas arise or not, this property, this stability of the Dhamma, this orderliness of the Dhamma, this conditionality, remains. The Tathāgata fully understands this and makes it known. Having fully understood, he reveals, teaches, proclaims, establishes, discloses, analyzes, and makes it clear, saying: 'See, bhikkhus, with birth as condition, there is aging and death.'

With continued existence as condition, there is birth… with clinging as condition, there is continued existence… with craving as condition, there is clinging…

with feeling as condition, there is craving… with contact as condition, there is feeling… with the six sense bases as condition, there is contact… with name-and-form as condition, there are the six sense bases…

with consciousness as condition, there is name-and-form…

with volitional formations as condition, there is consciousness… with ignorance as condition, there are volitional formations. Whether Tathāgatas arise or not, this property, this stability of the Dhamma, this orderliness of the Dhamma, this conditionality, remains. The Tathāgata fully understands this and makes it known. Having fully understood, he reveals, teaches, proclaims, establishes, discloses, analyzes, and makes it clear, saying: 'See, bhikkhus, with ignorance as condition, there are volitional formations.' Thus, bhikkhus, such is the truth, the unerring, the not otherwise, the conditionality—this is called, bhikkhus, dependent origination.

And what, bhikkhus, are the phenomena arisen from dependent origination? Aging and death, bhikkhus, are impermanent, conditioned, arisen dependently, subject to ending, subject to fading, subject to cessation, subject to relinquishment. Birth, bhikkhus, is impermanent, conditioned, arisen dependently, subject to ending, subject to fading, subject to cessation, subject to relinquishment. continued existence, bhikkhus, is impermanent, conditioned, arisen dependently, subject to ending, subject to fading, subject to cessation, subject to relinquishment. Clinging, bhikkhus… craving, bhikkhus…

feeling, bhikkhus… contact, bhikkhus… the six sense bases, bhikkhus… name-and-form, bhikkhus…

consciousness, bhikkhus…

volitional formations, bhikkhus… ignorance, bhikkhus, is impermanent, conditioned, arisen dependently, subject to ending, subject to fading, subject to cessation, subject to relinquishment. These are called, bhikkhus, the phenomena arisen from dependent origination.

When, bhikkhus, a noble disciple sees as they really are with correct wisdom this dependent origination and these phenomena arisen from dependent origination, then they will not run back into the past, thinking: 'Was I in the past, was I not in the past, what was I in the past, how was I in the past, having been what, what did I become in the past?' nor will they run forward into the future, thinking: 'Will I be in the future, will I not be in the future, what will I be in the future, how will I be in the future, having been what, what will I become in the future?' nor will they now in the present be tormented with doubt thinking: 'Am I, am I not, what am I, how am I, where has this being come from, where will it go?' For such a place does not exist. Why is that? For, bhikkhus, a noble disciple sees this dependent origination and these phenomena arisen from dependent origination as they really are with correct wisdom."