Discourse on Five Faculties (Second Analysis)

"Bhikkhus, these are the five faculties. Which five? The faculty of confidence (faith), persistence (energy), mindfulness, collectedness (samādhi) and wisdom.

And what, bhikkhus, is the faculty of confidence (faith)? Here, bhikkhus, a disciple of the noble ones has confidence, is convinced in the enlightenment of the Tathāgata, acknowledging: 'Indeed, the Blessed One is an Arahant and perfectly awakened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, well-gone, knower of the world, an unsurpassed guide for trainable individuals, a teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' This is called the faculty of confidence.

And what, bhikkhus, is the faculty of persistence (energy)? Here, bhikkhus, a disciple of the noble ones keeps his persistence aroused for the giving up of unwholesome mental qualities and for the cultivation of wholesome mental qualities. With steadfast determination and unwavering effort, he generates desire, strives, arouses persistence, comprehends with his mind, and makes an effort, both to prevent the arising of unarisen harmful unwholesome mental qualities and to abandon existing ones, and to bring forth and develop unarisen wholesome mental qualities and enhance those that have arisen. This, bhikkhus, is called the faculty of persistence.

And what, bhikkhus, is the faculty of mindfulness? Here, bhikkhus, a disciple of the noble ones is fully attentive, equipped with utmost mindfulness, able to recall and reflect upon things done and said long ago. He practices by observing the body in and of itself, ardently, with clear comprehension and mindfulness, having put away greed (lust, desire, attachment) and dissatisfaction (aversion, ill-will, resentment) for the world. Similarly, he applies this practice to feelings, mind, and mental qualities, dwelling as an observer who fully understands and remains mindful, eradicating worldly desires and dissatisfaction. This is called the faculty of mindfulness.

And what, bhikkhus, is the faculty of collectedness (samādhi)? Here, bhikkhus, a disciple of the noble ones, having made letting go his basis, attains stability of mind, attains unification of mind. Having secluded from sensual pleasures and unwholesome mental qualities, he enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which includes reflection and examination (of thoughts), born of seclusion, filled with rapture (joy) and pleasure. With the subsiding of reflection and examination (of thoughts), experiencing internal tranquility and unification of mind, he enters and dwells in the second jhāna, which is devoid of reflection and examination, and has rapture (joy) and pleasure born of a stable mind. With the fading of rapture, he dwells equanimous, mindful, and clearly aware, experiencing pleasure with the body, which the noble ones declare, 'He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful' - he enters and dwells in the third jhāna. With the letting go of pleasure and pain, and the disappearance of previous joy and grief, he enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna, characterized by neither pain nor pleasure, which possesses purification of awareness by equanimity. This, bhikkhus, is called the faculty of collectedness.

And what, bhikkhus, is the faculty of wisdom? Here, bhikkhus, a disciple of the noble ones is wise, endowed with the wisdom that understands the arising and passing away of phenomena, a wisdom that is noble and penetrative, and leads directly to the cessation of suffering. Such a disciple truly understands, 'This is suffering', 'This is the origin of suffering', 'This is the cessation of suffering', and 'This is the path leading to the cessation of suffering'. This is called the faculty of wisdom.

These, bhikkhus, are the five faculties."